The Village of Ambler 
I'm going to tell about Ambler, according to what I have heard, as my father used to tell about it.
In 1898, white people came and then they lived there in Ambler.
And later, when we were old enough to remember, Kilvaġiaq’s family lived there too.
Kilvaġiaq and his wife chose land with their children, and their children grew up there.
Kilvaġiaq’s family were Ambler people.
People from Shungnak came to join them there also.
It is a good place for fishing and hunting caribou and a good place for hunting bears.
They remained there.
In winter and summer, the Kilvaġiaq family always stayed in Ambler.
The people who used to stay with them died.
Even then, Kilvaġiaq's family stayed there until they got old and couldn't do much.
In 1943 I married their son, Ugiaġnaq.
We lived there even in summer.
I stayed with them about three years.
And we moved upriver when we had a little baby girl.
After we had our baby girl, my husband died and left me.
Ambler was a good place to live.
In 1958, people moved here from Shungnak, the seven families.
They marked off the land into lots and started living there.
Ambler became a village in 1958.
As for us, when I got married again, we moved here to be pastors in 1963.
From that time on, I have lived here.
My second husband died while we were pastors.
I worked as a pastor for three years, and after that I started working for the school in 1973.
The Ambler people had no school when they first started living here, and they had no church.
That’s how they started out.
In fall they fish under the ice.
When caribou come, they hunt for caribou.
In spring there’s a place for hunters to watch for game.
It’s a good place to live.
That’s why they moved here. 
Since long ago people have lived here.
Since we were old enough to remember, the Kilvaġiaq family lived here.
And right up until today, living here has been good.
It’s a good place for fishing and a good place for hunting.
We stay on here, even though our husbands have left us.
That’s the way we live.