Some Pharisees and several teachers of the Law of Moses from Jerusalem came and gathered around Jesus . 
They noticed that some of his disciples ate without first washing their hands . 
The Pharisees and many others obey the teachings of their ancestors . They always wash their hands in the proper way before eating . 
None of them will eat anything they buy in the market until it is washed . They also follow a lot of other teachings , such as washing cups , pi@@ tch@@ ers , and bowls . 
The Pharisees and teachers asked Jesus , Why don't your disciples obey what our ancestors taught us to do ? Why do they eat without washing their hands ? 
 Jesus replied: You are nothing but show-offs ! The prophet Isaiah was right when he wrote that God had said , All of you praise me with your words , but you never really think about me . 
It is useless for you to worship me , when you teach rules made up by humans . 
You disobey God's commands in order to obey what humans have taught . 
You are good at rejec@@ ting God's commands so that you can follow your own teachings ! 
 Didn't Moses command you to respect your father and mother ? Didn't he tell you to put to death all who curse their parents ? 
But you let people get by without helping their parents when they should . You let them say that what they own has been offered to God . 
You won't let those people help their parents . 
And you ignore God's commands in order to follow your own teaching . You do a lot of other things just as bad . 
Jesus called the crowd together again and said , Pay attention and try to understand what I mean . 
After Jesus and his disciples had left the crowd and gone into the house , they asked him what these say@@ ings meant . 
He answered , Don't you know what I am talking about by now ? You surely know that the food you put into your mouth cannot make you unclean . 
It doesn't go into your heart , but into your stomach , and then out of your body . By saying this , Jesus meant that all foods were fit to eat . 
Then Jesus said: What comes from your heart is what makes you unclean . 
O@@ ut of your heart come evil thoughts , vulgar deeds , stealing , murder , 
un@@ faithfulness in marriage , greed , mean@@ ness , dece@@ it , inde@@ c@@ en@@ c@@ y , en@@ v@@ y , insul@@ ts , pride , and foolishness . 
All of these come from your heart , and they are what make you unfit to worship God . 
Jesus left and went to the region near the town of Tyre , where he stayed in someone's home . He did not want people to know he was there , but they found out anyway . 
A woman whose daughter had an evil spirit in her heard where Jesus was . And at once she came and knelt down at his feet . 
The woman was Greek and had been born in the part of Syria known as Phoenicia . She begged Jesus to force the demon out of her daughter . 
But Jesus said , The children must first be fed ! It isn't right to take away their food and feed it to dogs . 
The woman replied , Lord , even pu@@ pp@@ ies eat the cru@@ mbs that children dro@@ p from the table . 
Jesus answered , That's true ! You may go now . The demon has left your daughter . 
When the woman got back home , she found her child lying on the bed . The demon had gone . 
Jesus left the region around Tyre and went by way of Sidon toward Lake Galilee . He went through the land near the ten cities known as Decapolis . 
Some people brought to him a man who was deaf and could har@@ dly talk . They begged Jesus just to touch him . 
After Jesus had taken him aside from the crowd , he stuck his f@@ ing@@ ers in the man's ears . Then he spit and put it on the man's tongue . 
Jesus looked up toward heaven , and with a groan he said , E@@ f@@ fa@@ tha ! which means Open up ! 
At once the man could hear , and he had no more trouble talking clearly . 
Jesus told the people not to say anything about what he had done . But the more he told them , the more they talked about it . 
They were completely amazed and said , Everything he does is good ! He even hea@@ ls people who cannot hear or talk . 
I can assure you that some of the people standing here will not die before they see God's kingdom come with power . 
 Six days later Jesus took Peter , James , and John with him . They went up on a high mountain , where they could be alone . There in front of the disciples , Jesus was completely changed . 
And his clothes became much whi@@ ter than any b@@ lea@@ ch on earth could make them . 
Then Elijah and Moses appeared and were talking with Jesus . 
Peter said to Jesus , Teacher , it is good for us to be here ! Let us make three shelters , one for you , one for Moses , and one for Elijah . 
But Peter and the others were terribly frightened , and he did not know what he was talking about . 
 The shadow of a cloud passed over and covered them . From the cloud a voice said , This is my Son , and I love him . Listen to what he says ! 
At once the disciples looked around , but they saw only Jesus . 
As Jesus and his disciples were coming down the mountain , he told them not to say a word about what they had seen , until the Son of Man had been raised from death . 
So they kept it to themselves . But they wondered what he meant by the words raised from death . 
 The disciples asked Jesus , Don't the teachers of the Law of Moses say that Elijah must come before the Messiah does ? 
 Jesus answered: Elijah certainly will come to get everything ready . But don't the Scriptures also say that the Son of Man must suffer terribly and be rejected ? 
I can assure you that Elijah has already come . And people treated him just as they wanted to , as the Scriptures say they would . 
When Jesus and his three disciples came back down , they saw a large crowd around the other disciples . The teachers of the Law of Moses were arguing with them . 
The crowd was really surprised to see Jesus , and everyone hurried over to greet him . 
Jesus asked , What are you arguing about ? 
Someone from the crowd answered , Teacher , I brought my son to you . A demon keeps him from talking . 
Whenever the demon attacks my son , it th@@ ro@@ ws him to the ground and makes him fo@@ am at the mouth and grit his teeth in pain . Then he becomes sti@@ f@@ f . I asked your disciples to force out the demon , but they couldn't do it . 
Jesus said , You people don't have any faith ! How much longer must I be with you ? Why do I have to put up with you ? Bring the boy to me . 
They brought the boy , and as soon as the demon saw Jesus , it made the boy shake all over . He fell down and began ro@@ lling on the ground and fo@@ am@@ ing at the mouth . 
Jesus asked the bo@@ y's father , How long has he been like this ? The man answered , E@@ ver since he was a child . 
The demon has often tried to kill him by throwing him into a fire or into water . Please have pity and help us if you can ! 
Jesus replied , Why do you say ‘@@ if you can@@ ’ ? An@@ ything is possible for someone who has faith ! 
At once the bo@@ y's father shouted , I do have faith ! Please help me to have even more . 
When Jesus saw that a crowd was gathering fa@@ st , he spoke ster@@ n@@ ly to the evil spirit that had kept the boy from speaking or hearing . He said , I order you to come out of the boy ! Don't ever bother him again . 
The spirit screa@@ med and made the boy shake all over . Then it went out of him . The boy looked dead , and almost everyone said he was . 
But Jesus took hold of his hand and helped him stand up . 
After Jesus and the disciples had gone back home and were alone , they asked him , Why couldn't we force out that demon ? 
Jesus answered , Only prayer can force out this kind of demon . 
Jesus left with his disciples and started through Galilee . He did not want anyone to know about it , 
because he was teaching the disciples that the Son of Man would be handed over to people who would kill him . But three days later he would rise to life . 
The disciples did not understand what Jesus meant , and they were afraid to ask . 
Jesus and his disciples went to his home in Capernaum . After they were inside the house , Jesus asked them , What were you arguing about along the way ? 
 They had been arguing about which one of them was the greatest , and so they did not answer . 
 After Jesus sat down and told the twelve disciples to gather around him , he said , If you want the place of honor , you must become a slave and serve others ! 
Then Jesus asked a child to stand near him . He put his ar@@ m around the child and said , 
 When you welcome even a child because of me , you welcome me . And when you welcome me , you welcome the one who sent me . 
John said , Teacher , we saw a man using your name to force demons out of people . But he wasn't one of us , and we told him to stop . 
Jesus said to his disciples: Don't stop him ! No one who works miracles in my name will soon turn and say something bad about me . 
 Anyone who isn't against us is for us . 
 And anyone who gives you a cup of water in my name , just because you belong to me , will surely be rewarded . 
It will be terrible for people who cause even one of my little followers to sin . Those people would be better off thrown into the ocean with a heavy stone tied around their ne@@ cks . 
 If your eye causes you to sin , get rid of it . You would be better off to go into God's kingdom with only one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into hell . 
 The wor@@ ms there never die , and the fire never sto@@ ps burning . 
Everyone must be sal@@ ted with fire . 
 Sal@@ t is good . But if it no longer tastes like salt , how can it be made salty again ? Have salt among you and live at peace with each other . 
It was before Passover , and Jesus knew that the time had come for him to leave this world and to return to the Father . He had always loved his followers in this world , and he loved them to the very end . 
Even before the evening meal started , the devil had made Judas , the son of Simon Iscariot , decide to betray Jesus . 
Jesus knew he had come from God and would go back to God . He also knew that the Father had given him complete power . 
So during the meal Jesus got up , removed his ou@@ ter garment , and wrapped a tow@@ el around his waist . 
He put some water into a large bowl . Then he began washing his discipl@@ es' feet and dr@@ ying them with the tow@@ el he was wearing . 
But when he came to Simon Peter , this disciple asked , Lord , are you going to wash my feet ? 
Jesus answered , You don't really know what I am doing , but later you will understand . 
You will never wash my feet ! Peter replied . If I don't wash you , Jesus told him , you don't really belong to me . 
Peter said , Lord , don't wash just my feet . W@@ as@@ h my hands and my head . 
Jesus answered , People who have ba@@ thed and are clean all over need to wash just their feet . And you , my disciples , are clean , except for one of you . 
Jesus knew who would betray him . That is why he said , except for one of you . 
 After Jesus had washed his discipl@@ es' feet and had put his ou@@ ter garment back on , he sat down again . Then he said: Do you understand what I have done ? 
You call me your teacher and Lord , and you should , because that is who I am . 
And if your Lord and teacher has washed your feet , you should do the same for each other . 
I have set the example , and you should do for each other exactly what I have done for you . 
 I tell you for certain that servants are not greater than their master , and messengers are not greater than the one who sent them . 
You know these things , and God will bless you , if you do them . 
 I am not talking about all of you . I know the ones I have chosen . But what the Scriptures say must come true . And they say , The man who ate with me has turned against me ! 
I am telling you this before it all happens . Then when it does happen , you will believe who I am . 
 I tell you for certain that anyone who welcomes my messengers also welcomes me , and anyone who welcomes me welcomes the one who sent me . 
After Jesus had said these things , he was deeply troubled and told his disciples , I tell you for certain that one of you will betray me . 
They were confused about what he meant . And they just stared at each other . 
Jesus' favorite disciple was sitting next to him at the meal , 
and Simon motioned for this disciple to find out which one Jesus meant . 
So the disciple le@@ aned toward Jesus and asked , Lord , which one of us are you talking about ? 
Jesus answered , I will dip this piece of bread in the sa@@ u@@ ce and give it to the one I was talking about . Then Jesus di@@ pped the bread and gave it to Judas , the son of Simon Iscariot . 
Right then Satan took control of Judas . Jesus said , Judas , go quickly and do what you have to do . 
No one at the meal understood what Jesus meant . 
But because Judas was in charge of the money , some of them thought that Jesus had told him to buy something they needed for the festival . Others thought that Jesus had told him to give some money to the poor . 
Judas took the piece of bread and went out . It was already night . 
After Judas had gone , Jesus said: Now the Son of Man will be given glory , and he will bring glory to God . 
Then , after God is given glory because of him , God will bring glory to him , and God will do it very soon . 
 My children , I will be with you for only a little while longer . Then you will look for me , but you won't find me . I tell you just as I told the people , You cannot go where I am going . 
 But I am giving you a new command . You must love each other , just as I have loved you . 
If you love each other , everyone will know that you are my disciples . 
Simon Peter asked , Lord , where are you going ? Jesus answered , You can't go with me now , but later on you will . 
Peter asked , Lord , why can't I go with you now ? I would die for you ! 
Would you really die for me ? Jesus asked . I tell you for certain before a rooster crows , you will say three times that you don't even know me . 
After Jesus had finished speaking to his disciples , he looked up toward heaven and pray@@ ed: Father , the time has come for you to bring glory to your Son , in order that he may bring glory to you . 
And you gave him power over all people , so he would give eternal life to everyone you give him . 
 E@@ ternal life is to know you , the only true God , and to know Jesus Christ , the one you sent . 
I have brought glory to you here on earth by doing everything you gave me to do . 
Now , Father , give me back the glory I had with you before the world was created . 
You have given me some followers from this world , and I have shown them what you are like . They were yours , but you gave them to me , and they have obeyed you . 
They know that you gave me everything I have . 
I told my followers what you told me , and they accepted it . They know I came from you , and they believe you are the one who sent me . 
I am praying for them , but not for those who belong to this world . My followers belong to you , and I am praying for them . 
All I have is yours , and all you have is mine , and they will bring glory to me . 
Holy Father , I am no longer in the world . I am coming to you , but my followers are still in the world . So keep them safe by the power of the name you have given me . Then they will be one with each other , just as you and I are one . 
 While I was with them , I kept them safe by the power you have given me . I guarded them , and not one of them was lost , except the one who had to be lost . This happened so that what the Scriptures say would come true . 
I am on my way to you . But I say these things while I am still in the world , so my followers will have the same complete joy that I do . 
I have told them your message . But the people of this world hate them , because they don't belong to this world , just as I don't . 
Father , I don't ask you to take my followers out of the world , but keep them safe from the evil one . 
They don't belong to this world , and neither do I . 
Your word is the truth . So let this truth make them completely yours . 
I am sending them into the world , just as you sent me . 
I have given myself completely for their sake , so they may belong completely to the truth . 
I am not praying just for these followers . I am also praying for everyone else who will have faith because of what my followers will say about me . 
I want all of them to be one with each other , just as I am one with you and you are one with me . I also want them to be one with us . Then the people of this world will believe that you sent me . 
I have honored my followers in the same way you honored me , in order that they may be one with each other , just as we are one . 
I am one with them , and you are one with me , so they may become completely one . Then this world's people will know that you sent me . They will know that you love my followers as much as you love me . 
Father , I want everyone you have given me to be with me , wherever I am . Then they will see the glory you have given me , because you loved me before the world was created . 
Good Father , the people of this world don't know you . But I know you , and my followers know that you sent me . 
I told them what you are like , and I will tell them even more . Then the love you have for me will become part of them , and I will be one with them . 
 Friends , I want to remind you that all our ancestors walked under the cloud and went through the sea . 
This was like being baptized and becoming followers of Moses . 
 All of them also ate the same spiritual food 
 and drank the same spiritual drink , which flowed from the spiritual rock that followed them . That rock was Christ . 
 But most of them did not please God . So they died , and their bodies were scattered all over the desert . 
What happened to them is a warning to keep us from wanting to do the same evil things . 
 They worshiped idols , just as the Scriptures say , The people sat down to eat and drink . Then they got up to dance around . So don't worship idols . 
 Some of those people did shameful things , and in a single day about 2@@ 3 , 000 died . Don't do shameful things as they did . 
 And don't try to test Christ , as some of them did and were later bi@@ tten by pois@@ on@@ ous snakes . 
 Don't even grumble , as some of them did and were killed by the destroying angel . 
These things happened to them as a warning to us . All this was written in the Scriptures to teach us who live in these last days . 
Even if you think you can stand up to temp@@ tation , be careful not to fall . 
 You are tempted in the same way that everyone else is tempted . But God can be trusted not to let you be tempted too much , and he will show you how to escape from your temptations . 
My friends , you must keep away from idols . 
I am speaking to you as people who have enough sense to know what I am talking about . 
 When we drink from the cup we ask God to bless , isn't that sharing in the blood of Christ ? When we eat the bread we break , isn't that sharing in the body of Christ ? 
By sharing in the same loa@@ f of bread , we become one body , even though there are many of us . 
 Aren't the people of Israel sharing in the worship when they gather around the altar and eat the sacrifices offered there ? 
Am I saying that either the idols or the food sacrificed to them is anything at all ? 
 No , I am not ! This food is really sacrificed to demons and not to God . I don't want you to have anything to do with demons . 
You cannot drink from the cup of demons and still drink from the Lord's cup . You cannot eat at the table of demons and still eat at the Lord's table . 
 We would make the Lord jealous if we did this . And we are not stronger than the Lord . 
 Some of you say , We can do whatever we want to ! But I tell you not everything may be good or helpful . 
We should think about others and not about ourselves . 
However , when you buy meat in the market , go ahead and eat it . Keep your conscience clear by not asking where the meat came from . 
 The Scriptures say , The earth and everything in it belong to the Lord . 
If an unbeliever invi@@ tes you to dinner , and you want to go , then go . Eat whatever you are served . Don't cause a problem for someone's conscience by asking where the food came from . 
If I give thanks for what I eat , why should anyone accuse me of doing wrong ? 
When you eat or drink or do anything else , always do it to honor God . 
Don't cause problems for Jews or Greeks or anyone else who belongs to God's church . 
I always try to please others instead of myself , in the hope that many of them will be saved . 
My children , I am writing this so you won't sin . But if you do sin , Jesus Christ always does the right thing , and he will speak to the Father for us . 
Christ is the sacrifice that takes away our sins and the sins of all the world's people . 
When we obey God , we are sure we know him . 
But if we claim to know him and don't obey him , we are lying and the truth isn't in our hearts . 
We truly love God only when we obey him as we should , and then we know we belong to him . 
If we say we are his , we must follow the example of Christ . 
 My dear friends , I am not writing to give you a new commandment . It is the same one you were first given , and it is the message you heard . 
But it really is a new commandment , and you know its true meaning , just as Christ does . You can see the darkness fa@@ ding away and the true light already shining . 
If we claim to be in the light and hate someone , we are still in the dark . 
But if we love others , we are in the light , and we don't cause problems for them . 
If we hate others , we are living and walking in the dark . We don't know where we are going , because we can't see in the dark . 
Children , I am writing you , because your sins have been forgiven in the name of Christ . 
Parents , I am writing you , because you have known the one who was there from the beginning . Y@@ oun@@ g people , I am writing you , because you have defeated the evil one . 
Children , I am writing you , because you have known the Father . Parents , I am writing you , because you have known the one who was there from the beginning . Y@@ oun@@ g people , I am writing you , because you are strong . God's message is firm in your hearts , and you have defeated the evil one . 
Don't love the world or anything that belongs to the world . If you love the world , you cannot love the Father . 
Our foolish pride comes from this world , and so do our selfish desires and our desire to have everything we see . None of this comes from the Father . 
The world and the desires it causes are disapp@@ earing . But if we obey God , we will live forever . 
Children , this is the last hour . You heard that the enemy of Christ would appear at this time , and many of Christ's enemies have already appeared . So we know the last hour is here . 
These people came from our own group , yet they were not really part of us . If they had been part of us , they would have stayed with us . But they left , which proves they did not belong to our group . 
Christ , the Holy One , has blessed you , and now all of you understand . 
I did not need to write you about the truth , since you already know it . You also know that liars do not belong to the truth . 
And a liar is anyone who says Jesus isn't truly Christ . Anyone who says this is an enemy of Christ and rejects both the Father and the Son . 
If we reject the Son , we reject the Father . But if we say we accept the Son , we have the Father . 
Keep thinking about the message you first heard , and you will always be one in your heart with the Son and with the Father . 
The Son has promised us eternal life . 
I am writing to warn you about those people who are mis@@ leading you . 
But Christ has blessed you with the Holy Spirit . Now the Spirit stays in you , and you don't need any teachers . The Spirit is truthful and teaches you everything . So stay one in your heart with Christ , just as the Spirit has taught you to do . 
After this , I heard what sounded like a lot of voices in heaven , and they were shouting , Praise the Lord ! To our God belongs the glorious power to save , 
 because his judgments are honest and fair . That filthy prostitute ruined the earth with shameful deeds . But God has judged her and made her pay the price for murder@@ ing his servants . 
 Then the crowd shouted , Praise the Lord ! S@@ mo@@ ke will never stop ri@@ sing from her burning body . 
After this , the 24 elders and the four living creatures all knelt before the throne of God and worshiped him . They said , Amen ! Praise the Lord ! 
 From the throne a voice said , If you worship and fear our God , give praise to him , no matter who you are . 
 Then I heard what seemed to be a large crowd that sounded like a roaring flood and loud thunder all mixed together . They were saying , Praise the Lord ! Our Lord God All-Powerful now rules as king . 
So we will be glad and happy and give him praise . The wedding day of the Lamb is here , and his bride is ready . 
She will be given a wedding dress made of pure and shining linen . This linen stands for the good things God's people have done . 
 Then the angel told me , Put this in writing . God will bless everyone who is invited to the wedding feast of the Lamb . The angel also said , These things God has said are true . 
I knelt at the feet of the angel and began to worship him . But the angel said , Don't do that ! I am a servant , just like you and everyone else who tells about Jesus . Don't worship anyone but God . Everyone who tells about Jesus does it by the power of the Spirit . 
 I looked and saw heaven was open , and a white horse was there . Its rider was called Fa@@ i@@ thful and T@@ rue , and he is always fair when he judges or goes to war . 
 He had eyes like flames of fire , and he was wearing a lot of crowns . His name was written on him , but he was the only one who knew what the name meant . 
 The rider wore a robe that was covered with blood , and he was known as The Word of God . 
He was followed by armies from heaven that rode on white horses and were dressed in pure white linen . 
 From his mouth a sharp sword went out to attack the nations . He will rule them with an iron ro@@ d and will show the fierce anger of God All-Powerful by tra@@ m@@ pl@@ ing the grapes in the pit where wine is made . 
On the part of the robe that covered his thi@@ gh was written , K@@ I@@ N@@ G OF K@@ I@@ N@@ G@@ S A@@ N@@ D Lord OF Lord S . 
 I then saw an angel standing on the sun , and he shouted to all the birds flying in the sky , Come and join in God's great feast ! 
You can eat the flesh of kings , rulers , leaders , horses , ri@@ ders , free people , slaves , important people , and everyone else . 
I also saw the beast and all kings of the earth come together . They fought against the rider on the white horse and against his army . 
 But the beast was captured and so was the false prophet . This is the same prophet who had worked miracles for the beast , so he could fool everyone who had the mark of the beast and worshiped the idol . The beast and the false prophet were thrown alive into a lake of burning sulfur . 
But the rest of their army was killed by the sword that came from the mouth of the rider on the horse . Then birds stu@@ ff@@ ed themselves on the dead bodies . 
